Good morning.
We're in the middle of a series that I will tell you.
I don't know how long we will be talking about this, but we are talking about transformation for the foreseeable future.
If you haven't seen them yet, it came to my attention that while I offered them to the children, I never formally invited adults to pick up a bracelet.
If you would like one, it simply says,
transformed, and Southrun Baptist Church on it.
They're in the North X.
We've got a bunch of them, actually.
And my hope is that you are all on this journey with me.
I'm not, well, one, I don't want to be on the journey alone.
But more than that, I don't pretend like I'm at the end of my journey and that I'm just telling you like the way I really do see myself.
on the journey of transformation.
I imagine all of us do, in some respects, or at least should.
And so my hope is, as we are on this journey, we learn some things together.
If there is a deep joy to my job, at least it brings joy to me and fills me with a lot of satisfaction.
is I get to learn things on the job, and specifically about whatever I'm preaching.
So I don't come every Sunday with things that I learned in seminary.
They're usually things that I learned this week, or at least within the last year.
And it's a really lovely part of what I get to do.
And then my hope is for you that it inspires some sort of
journey and learning of your own, that you too might pick up some pieces and pick up your own life and say, yeah, I want more of that, right?
And so as we go through these scriptures over, not just today's scripture, but like next week's and the week's after, I fully anticipate, again, learning alongside of you.
And my hope is that you'll dig in, you'll like embrace the whole transformed theme and that this will become a year of transformation for you personally and corporately for South Run Baptist Church.
It's a deep prayer of mine and something that I've been praying for quite a while.
Speaking of prayer, let's begin with prayer.
Heavenly Father, I come and we come and we give you thanks.
We thank you for your presence.
We thank you for your love.
We thank you for your mercy and forgiveness for reaching out to us.
Many of us come with anxiety or hardship or things swirling in our minds and our hearts.
And Lord, for these moments we ask for peace.
We ask for clarity.
clarity of mind and heart, that we might see you fully, completely.
And Lord, that we might begin the process once again of transformation.
Pray this in Christ's holy name, amen.
In 2008, there was a movie called The Curious Case of Benjamin Button.
Has anyone seen this movie?
The curious case of Benjamin Button.
So it's an odd movie.
I remember watching it long ago.
The premise is simple, if odd, which is that somebody, Benjamin Button, is born an old man and then spends his life getting younger and younger and younger as the movie progresses and his life progresses.
I think this is in large part.
Well, is in part what Paul is trying to say in Ephesians chapter 4.
I try not to get too cute with my titles, but this one feels a little too cute, especially for me.
Anti-aging is like a big thing these days, apparently.
And the women, they put on their creams.
Oh, apparently men do this now too.
And then there's a whole movement out there, if you're not familiar with it, of people who are trying to, of course, live longer and find that fountain of youth.
And I'm afraid they're doing it all wrong, or at least they're not doing it according to the way God would have us do it.
And so I'm gonna offer you what I take to be Paul's anti-aging message.
coming from Ephesians chapter four, perhaps drawing us into the story of Benjamin Button that we too might become young again.
I wanna begin with two claims that will be the claims I'll try to make a few times through this sermon and by the end of which I hope you believe.
The first is by a guy named G.K. Chesterton in a book called Orthodoxy, a chapter titled, The Ethics of Elfland, in which he says, we have sinned and grown old and our father is younger than we.
We have sinned and grown old and our father is younger than we.
Now, if you don't believe Chesterton, and I understand there might be some suspicion here,
My second quote is someone I think you trust a little more.
His name is Jesus.
And in Matthew 18, he says, truly I say to you, unless you turn and become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
Unless you become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
All right, let's open up Paul.
I hope you have the
The Bible in front of you, if you don't, there's one in your pew and you're going to want to have it because we're going to read through this somewhat slowly so that you pick up what Paul's putting down.
Chapter four of Ephesians starting verse 17 begins like this.
Now this, I say, and testify in the Lord that you must no longer walk as the Gentiles do in the futility of their minds.
They are darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to their hardness of heart.
Paul begins by attacking a few things here that are in the Gentiles, in case you don't know, he's speaking to an audience of Greeks and Romans primarily.
There might be a few Jews in his audience, but they're likely pagans.
which is to say non-Jews, right?
Christianity is like a very small thing at this point.
And so he's saying to them, look, he's attacking two things, their minds, right?
So he says multiple times, things like they have the futility of their minds, their understanding, their mind is darkened, and they have an ignorance that is about them.
If you think back to, well, Romans 12-2, this idea that the goal is that we are to be transformed in the mind.
Our minds, we are not to be conformed to the world, but be transformed by the renewing of our mind.
So Paul here is
kind of beating that same drum, which is that we've got all of these patterns in our minds, and we've got all of these literal grooves that are up there, as we've talked about in the past.
And the goal is to change those.
And we've got to get out of the old groove and start creating some new patterns.
And so Paul is once again banging this drum, and he's saying that their minds
Well, they are living in a certain form of darkness.
But then he says two things that I find fascinating.
One is that because of this, they are not in the life of God, which in reality is the only life there is, right?
That life, all life, comes from God.
And so if we are not in the life of God, then we're in no life at all.
In fact, if we are apart from the life of God,
Paul's point and Jesus' point and the whole scripture's point is that eventually that thing, it shrivels up and it dies.
And so if we want true life, abundant life, we must find it in God.
But then the second thing, and this is the very end of 18, it goes like this, that all of this is due to the fact that they have a hardness of heart, a hardness
of heart.
Here's something I learned this week.
This word, hardness of heart, it comes from the word perosis, which is a word you might be familiar with if you know the word osteoporosis.
If you know what osteoporosis is, it's the hardening of the bones or it's the making them fragile, right?
It's actually what is, so this picture up here is the
petrified forest, I think it's in Arizona.
Someone correct me if I'm wrong.
And what it is, there's trees that are millions of years old and they become hardened and porous and frail and fragile because of this.
And what is happening is those forests and the hard hearts here have become too
old, they've become too old.
And rather than keeping the heart supple and able to feel things and able to understand the things of God, what has happened to these Gentiles that he's worried about and to his audience that he's speaking to and to you and me is that if we allow our hearts to become a parosis, hardened, frail,
Well, we can no longer feel what God intends us to feel.
If I can just step aside and offer up a deep concern that I have for our entire world.
When I look on social media, a number of months ago, we saw a shooting of Charlie Kirk.
A few weeks ago, we saw a shooting of a woman named Renee Goode.
Just a week and a half ago, we saw a shooting of another man.
And all of this is just streaming into our eyes and our heads as if it's normal.
And my deep fear is that it is creating a hardness of heart that we are all part of, whether we want to be part of it or not.
that we are looking at these things and acting like they are normal and they are not normal.
There's nothing normal about what we are seeing there.
And it doesn't matter what part of the aisle you're on, right?
These terrible things are happening.
And over time we just get used to it.
And my plea to you is don't get used to it.
Don't allow your heart to be hardened.
Keep your hearts supple and soft.
All three of the people that I mentioned were children of God.
These are three people who are God's beloved and who have been taken from this earth.
That is a terrible thing.
The plea of the whole day, of this whole sermon,
that we keep our hearts supple, and that we not allow them to grow old, and that we find a way to be young again.
If we keep reading, in verse 19, Paul goes on, he says, they, our hearts, have become calloused, and they, the people, have given themselves up to sensuality, greedy to practice every kind of impurity,
But this is not the way you learned in Christ.
Paul says that the hardness or calluses on the heart have allowed people to do that which they should not do.
And he names a few things, specifically sensuality, maybe lust, right?
Or greed.
But any kind of impurity is his last category there, which is to say anything at all.
that is apart from, again, the way you learned in Christ.
Well, when you do those things, when you behave in that kind of way, one of two things happens.
Your conscience is pricked and you change your way, or you keep doing that thing and you build up calluses so that your conscience can no longer be pricked.
I implore you, allow it to be, soften your heart, that whatever that impurity is, whether it's lust, greed, or anything, that you allow God in there to do the work that needs to be done, to rip off those calluses and to find yourself changing once again.
Paul continues.
And he says this, assuming you have heard about Jesus and were taught in him as the truth is actually in Jesus.
And now he gets to the three verses that got me to this passage at all, which is to say to put off your old self, which belongs to your former manner of life and is corrupt through deceitful desires.
And here again, this is kind of the second piece in the foundation of my argument that we are old and we need to get young again, that we've gotten too old in life and too hardened and that the osteoporosis has set in on our hearts of all places.
And he says here that we need to get rid of the old self to put it off.
And this word old, I've always taken to mean
are former selves, the self who we were.
And it does mean that too, just so we're clear.
But the word is actually old.
It's ancient, it's the things long ago, right?
And so the old self is the person who has become too old.
And so then he says, what next?
Well, what we're supposed to do, well, in verse 23, we need to be renewed in the spirit of our minds.
renewed.
This word is used once in all of the New Testament right here.
And it simply means to be made young again, to be made young again, renewed.
And so Paul is saying, you had this old self, and now we need to be made young again.
And he says, well, how do we do this?
Well, in the spirit of our minds, the spirit, this is an odd phrase that Paul uses because there is a spirit and there's a mind and these are usually two different things and the mind doesn't typically have a spirit.
And so here's what I think he's saying.
In the posture of like the way you think about things, I need you to be young again.
I need you to think like a little kid thinks.
And I need you to be curious in the world.
And I need you to have open eyes to the possibility of what is out there and not to be closed off to what you assume the world is like and what your neighbor is like.
And I need you to have a posture of mind, a spirit of mind that is once again made young.
And then the third part of his three-part sermon here is verse 24.
We must put on the new self, which is created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness.
The likeness of God, the likeness of God.
I kept reading that and thinking, I bet Paul has in mind
Genesis 1, 26.
When we two were created, when we were created in the likeness of God.
And in fact, what he may be saying, I think he is, is something of a paradox.
You see, there is the old self, and the old self is indeed, well, it's old.
It's become hard-hearted, and osteoporosis has set in right here.
But there's actually an older self yet, the one from the foundations of the world, the way in which he created all of us to be, created how, in the likeness of God, in God's image, we were created.
And this is how it was all supposed to work from the beginning.
Until what happened, Genesis 1 turns to Genesis 2 and 3 and sin sets in and the heart turns to stone.
So Paul is saying to us, we indeed, as Chesterton says, have sinned and grown old and our father is younger than we.
Or as Jesus says, I say to you, unless you turn and become like children,
you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
Okay, so maybe, maybe you're ready to believe that this is true.
I might have some convincing left to do.
But the next question always is, Eric, how do we do that?
How?
How do we become young again?
There is a hard way and an easy way
And the easy way happens to also be a hard way.
We'll start with the hard.
A few weeks, well, the week and a half, just over a week ago, I was in Waco, Texas with my son.
We were at Baylor's campus.
And I caught up with a woman who entered the PhD program when I did.
We went through it together.
She has had a little more academic success than I have, and she is now working there, and she's doing very well.
And we talked about one of our professors, Dr. Talbert.
Dr. Talbert was a hard and a harsh man.
He was known for being able to make grown men cry.
He was taxing, he was very difficult, and he made my life
very difficult in those years.
Alicia, my friend, and I were talking about Dr. Talbert, and she told me this story that broke my heart, and again, epitomizes what I take to be the hard way.
About a year or two after I finished the program and had left, Dr. Talbert had a stroke.
He nearly died, but he did not die.
In fact, he lived for 10 more years after that.
Alicia informs me that his daughter is so appreciative for those 10 years after the stroke because according to her, his daughter said for the first time in her life she had a dad.
Something happened to Dr. Talper in that stroke to cause him to wake up.
and to soften whatever was going on here, and to recognize he needed to live a very different kind of life.
That, my friends, is the hard way, and I hope you don't have to learn the hard way how to soften this.
Let me offer you the easy way.
The easy way, again, is not easy.
It to is hard.
but it begins with the recognition that something's wrong and you need to change.
And so the easy way might look something like this, a recognition of what the old us looks like and what the young us could look like or should look like.
By the way, when I say old, here's how I understand this to work.
Something happens in childhood.
And there's, I can't put like an exact year on this, but where you move from childhood into, we'll say like adolescence.
And it's at this point that the hardness kind of starts to creep in.
And then from there, it only gets harder, but
It's not to say it's like a one-way street because I meet many folks, you and outside of this church, who are aging in a way that is beautiful and good and recognizes the suppleness of your heart.
And I think to myself, this person, despite being older in age than other peers that I have or people who are younger than me,
This person, they appear younger and healthier and more vibrant.
And so this is what we're going for.
It's not about a numerical age of oldness.
It's about what's in here.
So it looks like this.
The old heart is filled with certainty, certainty about the world, the way it works, who does what, the good guys and the bad guys, the people that are around them,
Certainly your spouse and all of their flaws and their problems, maybe some of their goodness too, but they're certain of all this.
The young of heart, the young is curious.
No matter how long they've known this person or this world, they keep their eyes open, ready to be surprised, surprised by what their spouse might do or say.
surprised by what the world may offer in all the best kind of ways.
They have a certain realism about them, but a realism that also hopes and has an optimism about what the world might do.
The old heart, well, it looks on the world with suspicion.
Always ready for something to go wrong.
They live guarded lives.
They've probably been hurt more than a few times.
They want to make sure that doesn't happen again.
And so they build walls around it.
They cut themselves off from anything that might hurt them.
But the young, the young heart, it still trusts.
It trusts, just like the young person, that there's just going to be food in the refrigerator no matter what happens, right?
or they trust that whoever comes along and picks them up and that they're a good person and that they're safe in their arms, they trust.
The young heart is able to trust.
The old heart is filled with inhibition, afraid to get on the dance floor because they're afraid of what other people might think.
What would this other person say?
And they put up walls again around them in order to keep them safe from the judgment of others because they're not so sure what others might think.
But the little ones, the young at Har, they live with abandon and they trust others.
that this is a non-judgmental space.
And if somebody does judge them, well, that's their problem.
Why would they do such a thing?
The old heart.
It is much like my own, unfortunately, too often.
It is all about efficiency, getting from one place to the next quickly.
And with purpose, always in a rush, because there's always a lot to do.
There's too much to do.
If you've ever had children under the age of five and you've tried to get them to church in the morning, efficiency is nowhere on the radar.
They live an unhurried life.
They are casually walking about this world, enjoying every moment of it.
Until mom or dad comes along and says, hurry up, get your shoes on, we've got to get to church.
an unhurried life is a beautiful thing.
I think there's a way in which the youngest among us can teach us so much about how to grow older in ways that we've somehow lost.
Transformation looks a lot like putting some of the old self behind
and embracing the young self.
Paul also talks more specifically about sin and what this looks like.
And so if you want to read 25 to 32, you'll find the following things in there.
And he'll say that the old heart looks like somebody who tells falsehoods and lies, but the new heart or the young heart, well, they tell the truth.
The old heart is filled with sinful anger, but the young heart tries to resolve things before the sundown.
The old heart it takes doesn't give back, but the new or the young heart is working in order to share with others.
The old heart is filled with corrupt and toxic talk.
while the young heart builds others up and speaks life into others.
And lastly, he says that the old heart, well, it has bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, and slander on its lips.
But the young heart, the new heart, filled with kindness, it is tender-hearted, that's Paul's word, tender-hearted and forgiving.
The questions you're now left with include the following, diagnosis questions, what calluses do you have on your heart?
Where have you grown old?
Where have you grown unfeeling?
Paul offers us in his letter two categories, the categories of sin, maybe it's lust or greed or any impurity that you've grown accustomed to.
And it's time to rip that callus off of your heart.
Or it could look like personal things, the way you treat other people, lying to others, excessive anger, taking instead of giving corrupts or toxic talk, bitterness, wrath, anger, or clamor.
So it starts with the diagnosis of yourself.
What's going on in here?
Where have I gone wrong?
And where do I need God to pierce the hardness?
And then comes the cure.
The cure, well, this is the part that maybe is the hardest.
And I wish I had like clear cut answers for you.
But you have to answer somehow, how will you become young again?
How will you soften your heart?
How will you renew the spirit of your mind or the posture of your mind?
I assure you, it involves curiosity and trust and abandon and becoming unhurried because we have sinned and grown old and our father is younger than we.
But truly, I say to you, unless you turn and become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
Let's pray.
God, our Father in heaven,
We are your children, and yet somehow we have grown old.
We have allowed the things of this world, oftentimes the things that have hurt us and that we are guarding against to harden our hearts.
God, show us a better way, a way in which we can become young again, filled with curiosity and hope and optimism
about ourselves and others, and what is possible in this world.
That you are redeeming this place, and restoring it, and that we, we are to be part of that process.
God, I give you thanks for Salfram Baptist Church, and for each person in this room.
As a journey toward transformation, may you show them the way.
In Christ's name we pray, amen.
Friends.